The university textbook market is about $4 billion in new books
and $2 billion in used books.

There are on the order of 14 million college and university students;
the California Community College system alone has 4.1 million students.

There is mounting pressure on colleges and universities
to admit more students as the children of baby boomers reach college age.
UC Berkeley needs to admit 4,000
more students annually, phased in over the next 10 years.
That means hiring more faculty, building more classrooms, and teaching
more efficiently -- especially by using "classrooms without walls"
(distance learning) and finding ways to automate some student services,
such as grading homework.
Middle and lower-tier universities see increased use
of technology in the classroom as a selling point for their schools.

Paper ("dead-tree") textbooks don't stay up-to-date. They
don't adapt to students' needs. They provide a limited number of exercises
and examples. They provide a limited number of homework problems, and those
problems need to be graded by an instructor, who needs to collect the
assignments, grade them, record the grades, and hand the assignments back.
Moreover, sales of new books begin to drop immediately after the semester
they are introduced, as sales of used books compete with new book sales.

Our online instructional materials overcome all these problems.
The materials include all the elements of a traditional book, and in addition
    1) Examples and exercises in the text change every time the student reads a
         chapter, allowing unlimited practice and unlimited tutoring.
       Exercises accept student responses and are scored instantly to give
         immediate feedback.
       Detailed solutions update continuously to correspond to the exercises.
    2) Homework assignments are submitted on the web, graded automatically,
         and the grades are logged to a website that students can query, and
         that instructors can use to manage the class.
       Every student gets a different version of each assignment, but all are
         graded automatically, and each student can see the solutions to his or
         her version after the due date -- "mass customization."
    3) Java applets illustrating key concepts are embedded in the text.
       The applets also allow instructors to demonstrate ideas in class.
       Students can reproduce any demonstration done in lecture, without
         specialized software ("reproducible lectures").
    4) Review materials include interactive tutorials, where the line of questioning
         changes depending on the student's responses.
    5) The text and assignments have links to an extensive glossary of all the
         technical terms used in the class.

The materials are written in HTML, Java, and JavaScript. They are accessible
from anywhere in the world, using any standard browser (both Netscape and Internet
Explorer) No plug-in or proprietary software is needed, minimizing technical
barriers for the student and the instructor.  Moreover, the software is written
in such a way that the bandwidth requirements are minimal -- a 28.8kbps modem
connection is adequate.

Instructors control assignments and manage grades, etc., through a simple web
interface that does not require the professor to know how to program.

New model: information is free, pay for services.

Services to instructors and universities:
   teaching without classrooms or instructors
   grading homework
   grading exams
   managing courses -
        tracking assignment grades
        computing course grades
        managing assignment deadlines
        managing enrollment

Services to students:
   better pedagogy than traditional books
   reduced costs -
       less expensive than a textbook
       eliminates the need for special-purpose software

I have been using these materials for about 3 years in large lecture courses
(300-400 students). This saves the department approximately $3000 per class in
grading homework.

There is unsolicited demand from universities ranging from University of Cambridge to
Gallaudet University, University of Alaska, Southern Methodist University, University
of California, University of Colorado, University of Toronto -- and even high school
teachers leading advanced placement classes.
I have been approached by accounting firms who want to use the
materials to train CPAs in statistical methods for audits, and by manufacturers who
want to use the materials to train engineers.  I have received rave comments from
undergraduates at other universities, from engineers at software firms and automotive
manufaturerers, and from professors of Communications and of Statistics.

Versatile infrastructure.
The software libraries can be used for many other courses; the first targets
are calculus, economics, and econometrics.  The design makes it easy
to implement all the features described above, with different course content.
Universities are spending on the order of $140,000 per course to develop
materials that amount to online lecture notes, lacking any of the functionality
and interactivity of this software.  The market for these materials at
UC Berkeley alone is approximately 3,000 units/year in Statistics, 5,000 units/year
in Economics, and 8,000 units/year in Calculus.


Philip B. Stark is Professor of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley.
Stark began his undergraduate education at MIT at the age of 15.  He graduated
from Princeton University in 1980 at age 19 with a degree in Philosophy.
After attending law school briefly at the University of Texas and working in
industrial marketing, he started graduate work in Geophysics, and in 1986 received his
Ph.D. from the University of California, San Diego, Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
He won an NSF postdoctoral fellowship in Mathematical Sciences in 1987 and joined the
Statistics faculty at UC Berkeley in 1988. He was a Presidential Young Investigator
from 1989-1994.  Stark is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics, a member of a variety of
professional societies in Statistics and Mathematics, a former Miller Research Professor,
and has served on the editorial board of international Statistics, Geophysics, and
Applied Mathematics journals.  His research focuses on inference problems in
astronomy and geophysics with large datasets. He consults in legal, legislative, and
scientific applications of Statistics, and has given testimony before the
U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on the Census, and the State
of California Natural Resources Subcommittee.