Paper ("dead-tree") textbooks don't stay up-to-date. They don't adapt to
students' needs. They are not interactive.  They provide a limited number
of exercises and examples. They provide a limited variety of homework problems,
and those problems need to be graded by an instructor, who must collect the
assignments, grade them, record the grades, and return the assignments
to the students. Textbooks don't help instructors administer courses.

Philip Stark has developed online instructional materials for lower-division
statistics that address all these limitations of traditional textbooks.
The materials include all the elements of a traditional book, and in addition:

    1) Examples and exercises change every time the student reads a
         chapter, allowing unlimited practice and unlimited tutoring.
       Exercises accept student responses and are scored instantly to give
         immediate feedback.
       Detailed solutions update continuously to correspond to the exercises.

    2) Homework assignments are on the internet, are solved using tools on the
         internet, are submitted over the internet, are graded instantly and
         automatically, and the grades are available over the internet.  Instructors
         do not need to handle, grade, or log homework.
       Students can see their own scores and summary statistics for their class
         on the web within seconds of submitting the assignment.
       Every student gets a different version of each assignment, but all versions
         are graded automatically, and each student can see the solutions to his or
         her version after the due date.
       Exams have been written the same way: once the department has enough terminals for
          students to take the exam simultaneously with supervision,
          each student will be administered a unique, automatically graded and logged,
          version of each exam.  At present, several versions are printed, and
          students use Scantron forms.

    3) Java applets illustrating key concepts are used throughout the text.
       The applets facilitate classroom demonstrations, which can be reproduced
          by students at home, without additional software.
       The same applets are used to solve homework problems, and to view grade
          summaries.
       There are applets for
              *probability calculations for the normal, binomial, chi-square,
                    exponential, geometric, hypergeometric, negative binomial, Poisson,
                    and Student t distributions
              *histograms
              *scatterplots
              *regression
              *correlation
              *sampling distributions
              *confidence intervals
              *the Law of Large Numbers
              *Venn diagrams
              *a general-purpose calculator with uniform and normal random number generators
                 and combinatorial functions

    4) Review materials include interactive tutorials, where the line of questioning
         changes depending on the student's responses, and practice exams that
         grade themselves for instant feedback.

    5) The text and assignments have links to an extensive glossary of all the
         technical terms used in the class.  Flipping to the back of the book is
         replaced by clicking.

    6) Instructors control assignment due dates by editing a simple text file;
         this controls access to the assignments and also "publishes" the assignment
         list without extra effort.
       Instructors can include grades from external assignments easily;
         those grades are then accessible on the web in the same way as the
         automatically graded assignments (password-protected access to individual
         student grades, and histograms and summary statistics for all students).
       Instructors can generate machine-readable grade summaries to calculate
         course grades easily.

The materials compromise between a "statistical literacy" course, such as the
superlative book Statistics, by Freedman, Pisani, and Purves (Norton, 1996, FPP),
and a more traditional "statistical methods" text, such as Introduction to the
Practice of Statistics, by Moore and McCabe (W.H. Freeman, 1993, M&M). The material has
more mathematical and probabilistic content than FPP, but does not emphasize
formulae as much as M&M do. Overall, the material is harder than both FPP and M&M
computationally, especially the probability sections, but easier than FPP in the
level of statistical reasoning. I have tried to attain the correctness and clarity
of thinking and exposition of FPP; I am aware that I have fallen short of the mark,
thus far. I do more with counting arguments and combinatorics than either of those
books. By incorporating applets into the text, exams, and problem sets, I have been
able to get students to analyze real datasets (at this time, the largest has 913
observations of 5 variables) without the pedagogical overhead of teaching students
to use a proprietary statistics package. Many examples are drawn from my consulting
experience, and most of the data are real -- from the U.S. Census, litigation,
geophysical experiments, the EPA, the ETS, the California Department of Fish and Game,
etc. Using applets has also eliminated the need to teach students to read arcane
tables associated with different distributions; instead, the student sets the relevant
parameters, highlights a range of values of the probability density or probability
histogram, and reads off the probability. Some demonstrations would have been
impossible to program in a statistics package.

The materials are written in HTML, Java, and JavaScript. As of 3 December 1999,
the materials consisted of 163 HTML files containing about 60,800 lines of
HTML and JavaScript, 63 Java classes containing about 14,900 lines of code,
eight JavaScript libraries containing about 3,100 lines of code, 25 data files
containing about 5,400 records, and a handful of .jpg and .gif files.
The materials are accessible from anywhere in the world, using any reasonably
up-to-date browser, and do not need any "plug-in."

ADD SOMETHING ABOUT THE FLEXIBILITY OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE.

The choice to use HTML, Java and JavaScript was motivated by these
design criteria:

   1) Maximize accessibility and portability. Recent browsers allow this material to be
    accessed from almost anywhere in the world, without adding "plug-ins" to the
    browser, and without buying any proprietary software. The software runs under every
    major operating system (UNIX, LINUX, Windows 9x and NT, Mac OS), because Netscape
    and/or Microsoft have versions of their browsers that run on those operating systems.
    Moreover, if a "plug-in" were required, downloading the plug-in would itself
    present a considerable barrier to some students.  Browsers come installed on all
    new personal computers, so this material is immediately accessible to new computer
    owners.

   2) Maximize interactivity and minimize technological barriers. Students should be
    able to explore data and to ask and answer "what-if" questions, without needing
    to learn how to use a conventional statistical software package. Tools should
    have a point-and-click interface whose use is obvious (no hidden menus, consistent
    GUI, etc.).

   3) Make the content dynamic.  One of the principal advantages of an online text over
    a paper one is that the online text can change in pedagogically valuable ways, and can
    adapt to the reader's needs.

   4) Minimize bandwidth and maximize speed. Using Java allows the figures and plots to be
    generated on the client-side. The code and data download to the client, then the client
    computes and creates the figures. This is by far the most efficient way to get dynamic
    interaction with the data. Otherwise, every time the user changed a parameter value, the
    client would need to send a message to the server, and the server would have to compute
    the new figure, and send the resulting figure over the internet to the client. Interactive
    real-time data exploration would not be possible. There are a few figures stored as
    GIF or JPG files; almost all the figures are computed by the client. Sending just the
    data and the rules (programs) for generating figures from the data substantially
    reduces the time it takes pages to load.  The materials can be viewed comfortably with
    a 28.8 Kbps modem connection.

   5) Make it easy to use the materials in lectures. Because the software runs on the client,
    not the server, it is easy to display the content in the classroom without an internet
    connection. That allows the instructor to demonstrate concepts and the use of the
    materials in class.

   6) Make it easy for instructors to set due dates for assignments and manage a course, and
    for students to track their own progress. Due dates are controlled by the instructor by
    editing a simple text file. The instructor can modify grades, compute course scores, enter
    extra credit assignments, etc., using text files. Perl-cgi routines (written by Ofer Licht
    of the SCF) log student submissions, and allow students and instructors to view
    grades over the internet.

   7) Maximize portability on the server side. Rather than use proprietary solutions,
    such as Microsoft active server pages (.asp pages) or server-side JavaScript, the "back
    end" for these materials is a collection of perl cgi routines. The server only needs
    to support html and perl. This makes the package platform-independent on the server
    side as well as the client side: there are public-domain perl implementations for
    all popular operating systems.

Prof. Stark has been using these materials for about 3 years in large lecture courses
(Statistics 2 and Statistics 21, each with 300-400 students).
This saves the department approximately $3000 per class per semester in grading homework.
Student responses have varied considerably, from abject technophobia to absolute delight;
overall, the response from UCB students is favorable and improving as browsers become
more stable and more familiar. The site accounts for over 60% of the department's web
traffic. Everything but the problem sets can be viewed by the public at the URL
statistics.berkeley.edu/~stark/SticiGui (To see the problem sets, one must be enrolled
in a course that uses the materials.)

There is unsolicited demand to use the materials by institutions including
The University of Alaska, The University of Cambridge, The University of Colorado,
Gallaudet University, Southern Methodist University, and The University of Toronto
-- and even high school teachers leading advanced placement classes, accountants,
and engineers in various industries.  Prof. Stark intends to make the materials
available to other institutions in Fall, 2000.



